Test Data
=========

This module mirrors the C++ ``VirtualCasingTestData`` utility to generate
small, deterministic datasets for validation. The JAX port keeps the same
mathematical constructions and discretization choices so parity checks can
be performed without relying on the C++ backend.

Overview
--------

The test data builder provides:

- Prebuilt analytic surfaces (axisymmetric, rotating ellipse, and ``W7X``)
- Synthetic magnetic fields from internal/external current loops
- On-surface target grids and off-surface evaluation points
- ``GradB`` computed from the Biot–Savart gradient kernel

These utilities are intended for validation and regression tests. They are
not performance-optimized and intentionally favor determinism over speed.

Surface Coordinates
-------------------

The surface generator follows the BIEST definitions exactly. For the
axisymmetric and rotating-ellipse families, the toroidal coordinate
``t`` and poloidal coordinate ``p`` are used to construct a twisted
ellipse cross-section. Let ``theta = 2π t / Nt`` and ``phi = 2π p / Np``.
The base cross-section is

.. math::

   \mathbf{x}_\perp = (\cos\phi, \sin\phi),

optionally deformed by

.. math::

   x_\perp \leftarrow \frac{\cos\phi + \exp(\cos\phi) - 1.5}{2.4}

for the ``Axisym*`` variants without a strict ellipse. The cross-section is
rotated by a toroidal-dependent angle and embedded in 3D:

.. math::

   R = x_\perp' + R_0,
   \quad X = R\cos\theta, \; Y = R\sin\theta, \; Z = y_\perp'.

For ``Stell`` and ``W7X``, the surface is defined by Fourier series:

.. math::

   R(\theta,\phi) = \sum_{i,j} R_{bc}(i,j)\,\cos(j\phi - N_{fp} i \theta),
   \qquad
   Z(\theta,\phi) = \sum_{i,j} Z_{bs}(i,j)\,\sin(j\phi - N_{fp} i \theta),

with ``Nfp=5`` for the built-in ``W7X`` coefficients. The coefficients are
embedded in :mod:`virtual_casing_jax.w7x_coeffs` and match the BIEST source.

Bundled Geometry Assets
-----------------------

The C++ code ships additional surfaces (``Quas3``, ``LHD``, ``W7X``) as
SCTL ``.mat`` files. For the JAX port these are converted to ``.npz`` and
bundled under ``virtual_casing_jax/geom``. The conversion is lossless and
uses the same scaling as the reference implementation:

- ``Quas3``: scale ``0.45`` and drop the final row/column (periodic seam).
- ``LHD``: scale ``0.25``.
- ``W7X``: scale ``0.45``.

The conversion script lives in ``tools/convert_geom_mat.py``. JAX loads
the assets via :mod:`importlib.resources` and applies the same spectral
upsampling as the C++ ``SurfaceOp::Upsample`` call.

Synthetic Loop Fields
---------------------

Test fields are generated from a pair of loop families:

- An *internal* loop constructed by shifting the surface inward by a
  fixed normal offset and averaging over poloidal angle.
- A set of *external* loops placed at radii chosen from the internal loop,
  with random orientations generated by a deterministic ``drand48``
  sequence.

The magnetic field is computed using the Biot–Savart integral

.. math::

   \mathbf{B}(\mathbf{x}) = \frac{1}{4\pi}
   \int \frac{\mathbf{J}(\mathbf{x}') \times (\mathbf{x}-\mathbf{x}')}
   {|\mathbf{x}-\mathbf{x}'|^3}\,d\ell',

where the loop density uses the parametric derivative ``d\mathbf{X}/dt``
from the same spectral derivative operator used in the C++ implementation.

``GradB`` is generated with the analytic derivative of the Biot–Savart kernel,
matching the BIEST ``FxdU`` operator. This enables parity checks against the
C++ reference without finite differencing.

Randomization and Determinism
-----------------------------

The loop orientation uses a ``drand48``-compatible linear congruential
sequence with the standard default seed ``0x1234abcd330e``. The JAX port
exposes an optional ``rng`` argument to allow reuse of the same generator
across calls when exact sequencing is required. If no generator is provided,
a fresh deterministic generator is used for each call.

API
---

The test data builder is available both as functions and as a lightweight
class mirroring the C++ static API:

.. code-block:: python

   from virtual_casing_jax import SurfType, VirtualCasingTestData

   X = VirtualCasingTestData.surface_coordinates(
       nfp=1, half_period=False, nt=6, npol=5, surf_type=SurfType.AxisymNarrow
   )
   Bext, Bint = VirtualCasingTestData.magnetic_field_data(
       1, False, 6, 5, X, trg_nt=4, trg_np=4
   )
   GradBext, GradBint = VirtualCasingTestData.magnetic_field_grad_data(
       1, False, 6, 5, X, trg_nt=4, trg_np=4
   )

Validation
----------

The parity suite compares JAX outputs against C++ dumps generated from
``VirtualCasingTestData``. The datasets are stored under
``tests/data`` with prefix ``case_testdata_axisym`` and are exercised in
``tests/test_testdata_parity.py``.
